# Migration from v0.4 to v0.5

Version 0.5 brings many exciting changes but also a few major breaking changes.
In this chapter, all changes should be covered to help you migrating your existing code quickly.

## Components

`Component` unifies several traits that existed before.
It entirely replaces `AppUpdate`, `ComponentUpdate`, `AsyncComponentUpdate`, `MessageHandler`, `MicroModel`, `MicroWidgets`, `Components` and `Widgets`.
Components are now more similar to `MicroComponent` which means they are much more flexible and don't need a typed connection to their parent component.
This makes using the same component with different parent components much easier.
Instead of accessing the parent model, you define `InitParams` as a type that includes all information to initialize the component.

The life cycle has changed a bit, too.

1. [Initialization of the root widget](https://relm4.org/docs/next/relm4/trait.Component.html#tymethod.init_root).
   The reason behind this is to allow parent components to access the root widget before the rest of the component is initialized.
2. [Initialize the component itself and the widgets](https://relm4.org/docs/next/relm4/trait.Component.html#tymethod.init).
   This happens in one method now, which makes it easier especially for more difficult initializations.
3. Regarding updates, there hasn't been a lot of changes. However you can now optionally update view and model at once using [`update_with_view`](https://relm4.org/docs/next/relm4/trait.Component.html#method.update_with_view).
4. The [shutdown](https://relm4.org/docs/next/relm4/trait.Component.html#method.shutdown) method is called when the component is destroyed. Components don't have to live for the entire application lifespan anymore.

### Senders and messages

Components have three kinds of messages now:

1. `Input` is the regular `Msg` type from the `Model` trait in 0.4.
2. `Output` is the message type, that can be used to forward information to other components automatically (or `()` if you don't care about forwarding).
   You will find more information about initializing components in the next section.
3. `CmdOuput` is the output of commands.
   Commands are futures that are executed in the background.
   **They fully replace async workers.**
   The result of this future is the `CmdOutput` message handled in [`update_cmd`](https://relm4.org/docs/next/relm4/trait.Component.html#method.update_cmd), similar to the regular update function.

The `send!` macro is obsolete. Please use `sender.input(msg)` instead.

### Initializing components

Components are initialized in the [init](https://relm4.org/docs/next/relm4/trait.Component.html#tymethod.init) method of their parent.
You simply call `MyComponentType::builder()` to get a [`ComponentBuilder`](https://relm4.org/docs/next/relm4/struct.ComponentBuilder.html).
Then you launch the component by calling `builder.launch(init_params)` to receive a [`Connector`](https://relm4.org/docs/next/relm4/component/struct.Connector.html).
From the connector you can decide to automatically forward messages to another component or just [detach](https://relm4.org/docs/next/relm4/component/struct.Connector.html#method.detach) the connector to get a [`Controller`](https://relm4.org/docs/next/relm4/component/struct.Controller.html).
The **controller** is the type you now **store in the model of the parent component** instead of creating a separate components struct.
There's no `Components` trait necessary.

For types that implement `Componet` that don't have any widgets (such as implementers of the [`Worker`](https://relm4.org/docs/next/relm4/worker/trait.Worker.html) trait), you can call [`detach_worker`](https://relm4.org/docs/next/relm4/component/struct.ComponentBuilder.html#method.detach_worker) from a `ComponentBuilder`.
This spawns the internal runtime on a separate thread and gives you a [`WorkerController`](https://relm4.org/docs/next/relm4/worker/struct.WorkerController.html).

### Helper traits

#### `SimpleComponent`

`SimpleComponent` is a simpler variant of `Component` that helps with the implementation of `Component`.
Particularly, it doesn't support commands.

#### `Worker`

`Worker` is an even simpler variant of `SimpleComponent` that helps with the implementation of `Component`.
Particularly, it doesn't support widgets and allows running the components update loop on a different thread by using [`detach_worker`](https://relm4.org/docs/next/relm4/component/struct.ComponentBuilder.html#method.detach_worker).
**This is the replacement for the previously separate `RelmWorker` type.**

## Factories

Factories now work very similar to components.
In fact, the new [`FactoryComponent`](https://relm4.org/docs/next/relm4/factory/traits/trait.FactoryComponent.html) trait that replaces `FactoryPrototype` is almost identical to the `Component` trait.
Messages can now be optionally passed by using the [`ouput_to_parent_msg`](https://relm4.org/docs/next/relm4/factory/traits/trait.FactoryComponent.html#method.output_to_parent_msg) method.

`FactoryVec` was entirely removed in favor of `FactoryVecDeque`.
Edits to factories are now similar to `Mutex` and require a guard.
Then the guard is dropped, all changes are rendered automatically, so no render method is required anymore.

## The `view` macro

+ In general, a lot of internal macros were moved to be just attributes like `watch!` and `track!` now written as `#[watch]` and `#[track(optional_condition)]`.
+ Multiple arguments now don't need `args!()` but just `()` whereas tuples need two parenthesis `(())`.
+ Wrapping widgets into `Some` is now also an attribute `#[wrap(Some)]`.
+ Additional arguments are now passed with square brackets `[]` instead of parenthesis `()`.
+ Cloning variables for closures is always done with square brackets `[]` instead of parenthesis `()`.

<table>
<tr>
<th> Old </th>
<th> New </th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

```rust
view! {
    gtk::HeaderBar {
        set_title_widget = Some(&gtk::Box) {
            append: group = &gtk::ToggleButton {
                set_label: watch!(model.label),
                
                connect_toggled(sender) => move |btn| {
                    // ...
                },
            },
        }
    }
}
```

</td>
<td>

```rust
view! {
    gtk::HeaderBar {
        #[wrap(Some)]
        set_title_widget = &gtk::Box {
            append: group = &gtk::ToggleButton {
                #[watch]
                set_label: model.label,
                
                connect_toggled[sender] => move |btn| {
                    // ...
                },
            },
        }
    }
}
```

</td>
</tr>
</table>

### The `widget` macro

+ The macro in now called `#[component]`.
+ You need to use `let widgets = view_output!();` in the `init` function to inject the code from the `view` macro.
+ `pre_init` -> Code before `view_output!()`.
+ `post_init` -> Code after `view_output!()`.

## RelmApp

Now you need to specify an application id and a generic parameter is required when calling `run()`.

## Miscellaneous

+ `WidgetPlus::inline_css` now takes `&str` as parameter instead of `&[u8]`.

## Summary

| v0.4 | v0.5 |
| - | - |
| `Model` | `Component` |
| `AppUpdate` | `Component` |
| `ComponentUpdate` | `Component` |
| `AsyncComponentUpdate` | `Component` |
| `MicroComponent` | `Component` |
| `MicroWidgets` | `Component` |
| `MessageHandler` | `Component` |
| `FactoryPrototype` | `FactoryComponent` |
| `Model::Msg` | `Component::Input` |
| `Model::Widgets` | `Component::Widgets` |
| `Model::Components` | removed |
| `Components` | Store a `Controller` for each component in your model |
| `parent_sender` | Forward output messages from one component to another by using `Connector` |

> In case there's something missing, please let me know. You can simply open an issue on [GitHub](https://github.com/AaronErhardt/Relm4) or write a message in the [Matrix room](https://matrix.to/#/#relm4:matrix.org).
