# The widget macro reference

There are quite a lot of examples where the widget macro is used in this book. Yet, we haven't covered everything in the previous chapters and having all the information in one place is nice, too.

## Property names

The widget macros uses setter methods of gtk4-rs. You can find them at the [gtk4-rs docs](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk4-rs/git/docs/gtk4/index.html).

Many properties are also part of a trait. Make sure that this trait is in scope. In many cases you need to `use gtk::prelude::TraitName`.

For example, if you want to use the [`set_default_width`](https://gtk-rs.org/gtk4-rs/git/docs/gtk4/prelude/trait.GtkWindowExt.html#tymethod.set_default_width) method of the `GtkWindowExt` trait you need to `use gtk::prelude::GtkWindowExt`.

### Trait disambiguation

Sometimes you use several traits that implement the same method for a type so you need to tell Rust which trait it should use. For example the `set_child` function is implemented by both `gtk::prelude::GtkWindowExt` and `libadwaita::traits::ApplicationWindowExt`. If we use the regular syntax, the Rust compiler will get confused and tells us to specify the trait. So instead we use the `TraitName::method` syntax that's similar to [Rust's fully qualified syntax for trait disambiguation](https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch19-03-advanced-traits.html#fully-qualified-syntax-for-disambiguation-calling-methods-with-the-same-name).

```rust,no_run,noplayground
# use libadwaita::traits::ApplicationWindowExt;
ApplicationWindowExt::set_child = Some(&gtk::Box) { ... }
```

You can also use the full path of the trait.

```rust,no_run,noplayground
libadwaita::traits::ApplicationWindowExt::set_child = Some(&gtk::Box) { ... }
```

## Public widgets

If you want to make the widgets struct generated by the macro public, you can simply use `pub` as an attribute for the macro.

```rust,no_run,noplayground
#[relm4_macros::widget(pub)]
```

## Assign properties

Initialize a property with a value:

```rust,no_run,noplayground
property_name: value,
```

Initialize an optional property only if it's `Some` and ignore if it's none:

```rust,no_run,noplayground
property_name?: value,
```

Initialize a property that has multiple properties:

```rust,no_run,noplayground
property_name: args!(value1, value2, ...),
```

Initialize and automatically update a property:

```rust,no_run,noplayground
property_name: watch!(value1, value2, ...),
```

Initialize and automatically update a property with a tracker. The track_expression can be any expression that returns a bool. If it's true, it indicates, that the property should be updated:

```rust,no_run,noplayground
property_name: track!(track_expression, value1, value2, ...),
```

Initialize a property by iterating over an iterator. You can use this for repeated calls to setter functions, like `add_class_name` in case you have multiple class names in a `Vec`.

```rust,no_run,noplayground
property_name: iterate!(iterator),
```

## Add widgets

Without name:

```rust,no_run,noplayground
property_name = gtk::Box { ... }
```

> A common mistake is to accidentally use `:` instead of `=` for assigning widgets.

With name:

```rust,no_run,noplayground
property_name: name = gtk::Box { ... }
```

As reference:

```rust,no_run,noplayground
property_name = &gtk::Box { ... }
```

As `Option`:

```rust,no_run,noplayground
property_name = Some(gtk::Box) { ... }
```

As reference in an `Option`:

```rust,no_run,noplayground
property_name = Some(&gtk::Box) { ... }
```

Pass additional arguments with the widget. This will call `widget.property_name(box_widget, value1, value2, ...)` and can be used to call [attach](https://aaronerhardt.github.io/docs/relm4/gtk4/prelude/trait.GridExt.html#tymethod.attach) on a `gtk::Grid` for example.

```rust,no_run,noplayground
property_name(value1, value2, ...) = gtk::Box { ... }
property_name(value1, value2, ...): name = gtk::Box { ... }
```

The type of the widget created in all the examples above will always be `gtk::Box`. However, some properties are set with references or references in `Options` where this syntax becomes handy.

### Functions

Sometimes there's no default implementation for a widget, so you need a constructor or you want to pass a function that returns the widget.

If the function is associated with a type, you can simply use this syntax. The macro will assume the type of `gtk::Box::new()` is `gtk::Box`:

```rust,no_run,noplayground
property_name = gtk::Box::new() { ... }
```

For some functions, the macro can't guess the type or might even assume a wrong type. In such a case, add the type your function:

```rust,no_run,noplayground
property_name = new_box() -> gtk::Box { ... }
```

## Connecting events

When connecting events you can clone elements you need in the closure by putting it into the parentheses.

```rust,no_run,noplayground
connect_name(cloned_var1, cloned_var2, ...) => move |arg1, arg2, ...| { ... }
```

### Connecting to components

For connecting events directly to components you need to use brackets. In the brackets you can create new sender variables from the senders of your components.

```rust,no_run,noplayground
connect_name[sender1 = components.name1.sender(), 
    sender2 = components.name2.sender(), ...] => move |arg1, arg2, ...|
```

### The send macro

The send macro simply provides some syntactical sugar. This code 

```rust,no_run,noplayground
send!(sender, AppMsg::Increment)
```

expands to this code:

```rust,no_run,noplayground
sender.send(AppMsg::Increment).expect("Receiver was dropped!")
```

The unwrap is save because send errors should never happen, especially because Relm4 usually keeps the receiver alive.


## Factories

```rust,no_run,noplayground
property_name = gtk::Box { 
    factory!(model.data)
}
```

## Manual

Sometimes the macro isn't flexible enough. In this case, you can always use manual code that will not be modified by the macro.

Here's a list of all the options available.

```rust,no_run,noplayground
#[relm4_macros::widget]
impl Widgets<AppModel, ()> for AppWidgets {
    view! {
        // ...
    }

    additional_fields! {
        // ...
    }

    fn pre_init() {
        // ...
    }

    fn post_init() {
        // ...
    }

    fn manual_view() {
        // ...
    }
}
```

### Run custom initialization code

You can use the `pre_init` function inside the widgets macro to run code before the initialization of the view macro starts. This is useful if you want to generate values you later use in the view macro.

```rust,no_run,noplayground
fn pre_init() {
    // ...
}
```

You can use the `post_init` function to run code after the initialization of the view macro. This can be used to modify the widgets generated by the view macro for manual initialization. All variables and widget names used in the view macro and the `pre_init` function can still be used here.

```rust,no_run,noplayground
fn post_init() {
    // ...
}
```

### Add more fields to your widgets

The widgets struct is automatically generated by the macro, but sometimes you want to add your own fields. To do so, use the `additional_fields!` macro:

```rust,no_run,noplayground
additional_fields! {
    test: u8,
}
```

To initialize the variable, you can use either `pre_init` or `post_init`. Simply name a local variable like your custom field. I this case we could simply do this:

```rust,no_run,noplayground
fn post_init() {
    let test = 0;
}
```

The macro will then put all parts together to create the widgets struct and the `init_view` function.

```rust,no_run,noplayground
struct AppWidgets {
    ...
    test: u8,
}

impl Widgets<AppModel, ()> for AppWidgets {
    ...
    fn init_view(model: &AppModel, parent_widgets: &(), sender: Sender<AppMsg>) -> Self {
        ...
        let test = 0;
        AppWidgets {
            ...
            test,
        }
    }
    ...
}
```

### Manual view

You can also implement your own view logic that's added to the view code the view macro generates. To refer to the widgets, use `self` and `model` for the model.

```rust,no_run,noplayground
fn manual_view() {
    // ...
}
```
